# Telomere theory of aging

<p style='text-align:right'> Sharon K <br>19ms015 <br>28 Feb 2020 </p>

Telomeres are structures found at both ends of chromosomes in eukaryotes, and play an important role in preserving the information contained in our DNA. DNA polymerase, the enzyme that replicates DNA, can do so only in the 5'-3' direction. This imposes that the lagging strand be replicated only discontinuously. Thus, with each replication, a portion of the end of the DNA is lost. This causes a loss of information, and once the telomeres reach below a critical length, results in cell death. This was posed as the 'end replication problem' in the 1970s. However, the enzyme telomerase has the ability to extend telomeres, and is found in certain cell types like the germline cells and certain blood cells. Its activity is repressed in somatic cells. Telomerase is also reactivated in certain types of cancer cells, allowing them to replicate uncontrollably without loss of information. 

We see that telomere length is negatively correlated with age. Moreover, biomarkers for telomeric dysfunction and DNA damage (like slathmin and EF-1a) increase with age. The genetic disorder dykeratosis congenital, which causes accelerated shortening of telomeres, is associated with higher risk of several age-related diseases. Experiments of transgenic induction of telomerase gene in normal human cells resulted in increased the lifespan of the cells. This establishes that telomere length and senescence are not merely correlated but causal. Shorter telomeres can affect the health by more than just loss of information: It can cause genomic instability and result in interchromosomal fusion. In addition, it may contribute to telomere stabilisation in cancer cells. 

Telomere lengths can also be affected by many lifestyle factors like stress, smoking, obseity, diet, etc. and can influence the lifespan and overall health of an individual. Indeed telomere length was found to be positively correlated with fiber and negatively with polyunsaturated fatty acids. Dietary restriction and exercise is also found to reduce the pace of aging, by reducing DNA damage.